Epilepsy: a public health imperative
6
Executive summary
Introduction
Epilepsy is a brain disease characterized by abnormal brain activity causing seizures or unusual behaviour, 
sensations and sometimes loss of awareness. It carries neurological, cognitive, psychological and social 
consequences and accounts for a significant proportion of the world’s burden of disease, affecting around 
50 million people worldwide. The number of people with epilepsy is expected to increase further due 
to rising life expectancy worldwide and an increasing proportion of people surviving insults which often 
lead to epilepsy, such as birth trauma, traumatic brain injury (TBI), infections of the brain, and stroke. The 
physical, psychological and social consequences of epilepsy impose significant burdens on people living 
with the condition and their families. Around the world, people with epilepsy and their families suffer 
from stigma and discrimination, often facing serious difficulties in education, employment, marriage and 
reproduction. Nearly 80% of people with epilepsy live in low- and middle-income countries (LMIC), where 
treatment gaps exceed 75% in most low-income countries and 50% in most middle-income countries. 
This is despite the effectiveness and low cost of antiseizure medicines. 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which seek to achieve global economic, social and environmental 
sustainable development by 2030, will not be realized without investment in physical and mental health 
for all people, including those living with epilepsy. This report calls for accelerated action to highlight 
epilepsy as a public health priority and support investment in reducing the burden it places. 
At the Sixty-eighth World Health Assembly (WHA) in 2015, 194 Member States unanimously adopted 
resolution WHA68.20 on epilepsy which called for the need for coordinated action at the country level 
to address its health, social, and public knowledge implications. The third High-level Meeting on the 
prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) in 2018 highlighted the importance of 
mental health conditions, drawing the attention of policy-makers to integrate epilepsy into action on NCDs 
and mental health. This report represents a collaborative effort between the World Health Organization 
(WHO), the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE) 
to provide technical support to countries in addressing the needs of people with epilepsy.
The objective of this report is to raise the prioritization of epilepsy on the global agenda; to describe a 
public health approach that addresses its high burden; and to advocate for crucial actions that address 
gaps in epilepsy knowledge, care and research. It is written for not only policy-makers and public health 
experts and health care providers, but also for people living with epilepsy, their families and civil society 
organizations. 
Summary
7
Global burden of epilepsy 
Epilepsy accounts for over 13 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) and is responsible for more than 
0.5% of the global burden of disease (GBD). It affects people of all ages, sexes, races, income groups 
and geographical locations. Around 7.6 per 1000 persons have epilepsy during their lifetime. It has a 
bimodal distribution according to age with peaks in the youngest individuals and in those over 60 years 
of age. Epilepsy has a variety of causes, ranging from genetic, metabolic, infectious, structural, immune 
and unknown. There is a higher incidence of epilepsy in LMIC (139 per 100 000 person-years) compared 
with high-income countries (HIC) (48.9).
Epilepsy carries a significantly increased risk of premature mortality, compared with the general 
population. Among deaths directly attributable to epilepsy, important immediate causes include sudden 
unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), status epilepticus – characterized by seizure duration of over 30 
minutes or seizures occurring close together without recovery in between, unintentional injuries, and suicide.
In LMIC, early death among people with epilepsy is significantly higher than in HIC. Excess mortality in 
LMIC is more likely to be associated with causes attributable to lack of access to health facilities and 
preventable causes such as drowning, head injuries, and burns. This could be substantially reduced with 
education about the risk of death and improved access to treatments, including antiseizure medicines.
Roughly half of the people with epilepsy have coexisting physical or psychiatric conditions. 
Physical and psychiatric comorbidities in people with epilepsy are associated with poorer health outcomes, 
increased health care needs, decreased quality of life and greater social exclusion. The most prevalent 
psychiatric comorbidities are depression (23%) and anxiety (20%). Intellectual disability is the most 
common comorbidity in children with epilepsy (30–40%). Epilepsy is also commonly associated with 
neurodegenerative diseases. 
Epilepsy is a treatable condition. Up to 70% of people with epilepsy could become seizure free with 
appropriate diagnosis and use of cost-effective, and commonly available, antiseizure medicines. This can 
lead people with epilepsy to continue, or return to, a full and productive life. Despite the very low cost 
of antiseizure medicines, more than 75% of people with epilepsy in low-income countries do not receive 
treatment. Left untreated, people living with epilepsy face devastating social consequences, 
including stigma, discrimination and human rights violations.
Leadership and governance for epilepsy
Given the burden of epilepsy, a broad public health approach is needed to improve the care and 
quality of life of people with epilepsy. This requires governments to provide universal coverage through 
health and social care services, as well as policies and legislation to address stigma, discrimination and 
barriers to civil rights.
In many countries, laws impacting the lives of people with epilepsy are outdated and fail to protect and 
promote their human rights. Legislation for epilepsy, where it exists, sometimes actively violates the rights 
of people with epilepsy. This leads to unmet needs in the areas of education, employment, residential 
and community services, and access to appropriate and affordable health care. 
Leadership and governance are critical levers for addressing these challenges and to improve care and 
support for people with epilepsy. The implementation of policies and plans for epilepsy requires 
strong leadership and intersectoral collaboration. 
Epilepsy: a public health imperative
8
While significant steps forward have been made in recent years under the leadership of WHO/ILAE/
IBE, more action is needed globally as well as oversight for implementation in every country, to reduce 
the burden of epilepsy. Legislative initiatives, public campaigns and social programmes are needed to 
guarantee the social and human rights of people with epilepsy. These should align with international 
human rights standards and global health agendas such as SDGs. Appropriate and integrated treatment 
of people with epilepsy requires that governments allocate sufficient funds towards epilepsy care and 
adopt a public health approach. Better data and information systems are needed to make the case for 
prioritizing epilepsy in global public health agendas.
Comprehensive health care response to epilepsy
Health care for people with epilepsy involves providing health care and social services to decrease morbidity, 
premature mortality and adverse psychosocial outcomes associated with the condition. Providing quality 
epilepsy care is a challenge because of its complexity, chronicity and considerable comorbidity. 
The care needs of people with epilepsy are multifaceted and should be a matter of great concern for 
policy-makers in all countries, as there are considerable gaps in policies and care available for epilepsy 
worldwide. Access to care for people with epilepsy varies considerably across and within countries 
and unmet needs exist in every country, but particularly in LMIC. 
The spectrum of health care needs for people with epilepsy and their families can be viewed as a stepped 
model: starting with the initial diagnosis and continuing, as necessary, through to nonpharmacological 
therapies (e.g. surgery) for drug-resistant epilepsy (see figure below). The management of comorbidities 
should be an essential component at all levels of care. Multidisciplinary health care teams that 
emphasize person-centred care are also important in the stepped model (e.g. physicians, nurses, pharmacists, 
therapists and social workers). Community-based care should be emphasized to increase access to all 
people in need of epilepsy services. Social and educational services should provide individualized support 
to people with epilepsy, throughout the levels of care and should continue, as needed, even when the 
person is no longer having seizures.
Stepped model to improve quality of care for people with epilepsy
Primary care for initial identification of symptoms, 
diagnosis and basic medication treatment
L E V E L  1
Specialist care, adjunct tests for optimal 
diagnosis and medication treatment
L E V E L  2
Comprehensive pharmacological and 
nonpharmacological treatment
L E V E L  3
PUBLIC AWARENESS OF EPILEPSY, ITS SYMPTOMS AND EFFECTS
SOCIAL AND EDUCATION SERVICES
TREATMENT OF COMORBIDITIES
Summary
9
Policy-makers need to ensure that there are sufficient population and health care system data to determine 
the need for and evaluation of epilepsy care, identify appropriate training for providers, provide guidelines 
for quality health care, and allocate the required resources to ensure those living with epilepsy have access 
to adequate health and social services.
Country examples of comprehensive care for epilepsy do exist. The WHO Programme on reducing the 
epilepsy treatment gap has shown that epilepsy care can be cost-effectively integrated into the primary 
health system in low-resource settings. Through pilot projects in Ghana, Mozambique, Myanmar and 
Viet Nam the programme has meant that 6.5 million people now have access to health facilities where 
epilepsy care is available.
Access to antiseizure medicines 
Various terms are used to describe medicines used to manage acute seizures (e.g. antiseizure, anticonvulsant, 
and antiepileptic medicines/drugs); antiseizure medicines is the broadest possible term for this class of 
medicines (not all seizures are convulsive, nor do all seizures constitute epileptic conditions). 
People with epilepsy require treatment with antiseizure medicines for many years, sometimes for a lifetime. 
The abrupt withdrawal of antiseizure medicines may result in life-threatening consequences, including 
status epilepticus. Therefore, it is essential to ensure that access to these medicines is sustained over time 
to ensure uninterrupted treatment. 
The imperative to increase access to essential medicines was highlighted in the United Nations SDGs in 
goals 3.4 and 3.8. The key components of access are: rational selection, availability, affordability 
and appropriate use of essential medicines (see figure below). 

10
Ensuring uninterrupted supply of appropriate access to antiseizure medicines is one of the highest 
priorities. Policies should be in place to monitor supply chains and stock-outs in health facilities and 
address possible disruptions.
Access to antiseizure medicines offers the potential for approximately 70% of people with epilepsy to live 
seizure free (on medicines), with an opportunity to impact their quality of life and participation in society. 
Understanding the myriad of financial, educational and sociocultural barriers to accessing antiseizure 
medicines is crucial for the adequate planning of financial, health system and clinical interventions to 
help improve access to treatment for people with epilepsy. 
Actions to improve access to medicines should be addressed at the international, national, 
district, community and individual levels. There are different options when establishing health policies 
impacting access to antiseizure medicines. The optimal model to be adopted depends on the local context, 
and opportunities to integrate an epilepsy action plan within broader public health objectives. Transparent 
policies that involve all stakeholders – from suppliers to government acquisition – need to be developed. 
The social response: misconceptions and stigma in epilepsy 
Stigma is a significant contributor to poor physical and mental health in people with epilepsy 
and will not be improved with a single approach. A multipronged strategy, which is culturally appropriate, 
multisectoral and collaborative, is needed.
Misconceptions and poor understanding about the nature of epilepsy contribute to the burden of disease 
and lead to stigma. This includes the perception of epilepsy as a form of insanity, ruining people’s lives, 
and being untreatable or contagious. Misconceptions and negative attitudes cause people with epilepsy 
to feel shame, embarrassment and disgrace. The impact of feeling socially excluded contributes to the 
physical, psychological and social burden of epilepsy. Stigma can delay appropriate health care 
seeking, access to care, health financing and availability of treatment. 
Institutionalized discrimination in epilepsy affects employment, education, marriage and childbearing, 
and driving regulations. Discriminatory laws exist in a number of countries. Most were repealed decades 
ago, but the legacy of these laws can still lead to misconceptions and discrimination.  
Direct investments in health care do not necessarily lead to improvements in epilepsy-related stigma. To 
reduce stigma, funds need to be directed toward epilepsy awareness and stigma-reduction programmes. 
Policy-makers can reduce stigma by changing laws that are punitive to people with epilepsy. A multisectoral 
public health response needs to include interventions that improve the knowledge of individuals and 
their families, teachers, employers, health care providers, disability service providers, care providers, first 
responders, traditional healers, media, community and policy-makers.
Prevention of epilepsy
The high global burden of epilepsy requires prevention where possible. The major modifiable risk factors 
for epilepsy are: perinatal risk factors, central nervous system (CNS) infections, TBI and stroke, which, 
together, account for an estimated 25% of epilepsy cases.
•	 Perinatal risk factors related to epilepsy include gestational age at delivery, birth weight, maternal 
health conditions such as nutritional status, pre-eclampsia, the presence and skill of birth attendants, 
Summary
11
method of delivery, perinatal infection (e.g. human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]), and other adverse 
events and conditions. 
•	 Central nervous system infections, according to population-based studies, comprise three main 
categories: bacterial meningitis, viral encephalitis and neurocysticercosis. Bacterial meningitis and 
viral encephalitis combined account for approximately 2–3% of epilepsies in HIC and about 5% 
of epilepsies in LMIC. In some LMIC where the Taenia solium (pork tapeworm) is endemic, roughly 
one-third of epilepsies are attributed to neurocysticercosis. Malaria is one of the most common 
parasitic diseases worldwide. Its neurological form, known as cerebral malaria, is a potential cause 
of epilepsy in malaria-endemic regions of the world.
•	 Traumatic brain injury is the cause of epilepsy in 4% of LMIC and 5% of HIC. Road traffic injuries, 
falls and violence are the most common causes of TBI. The risk of epilepsy is higher in people with 
severe versus mild TBI (increased almost 20-fold). 
•	 Stroke, including ischaemic and haemorrhagic types, is also a common potentially preventable 
cause of epilepsy, representing 12% of epilepsies in HIC and 2.7% in LMIC. Seizures after stroke 
are associated with increased premature mortality, disability, and higher resource allocation and 
costs. In population-based studies, stroke was identified as a common cause of status epilepticus 
(12–40% in HIC, 5–15% in LMIC).
Estimates of the burden of epilepsy attributable to preventable causes are at best approximate and 
the true burden undoubtedly varies between regions and localities. The primary prevention of these 
causes has a substantial impact on the development of epilepsies and requires improving maternal 
health care and obstetrical services, communicable disease control, injury prevention, and cardiovascular 
and cerebrovascular health with reduction of the major risk factors of NCDs. An understanding of 
the development of epilepsy after a brain insult or parasitic infection is critical to the development of 
secondary preventive strategies.
Epilepsy research
Epilepsy research has enabled remarkable progress in deepening our understanding of the etiologies 
and mechanisms leading to epilepsy and associated comorbidities. It has also brought interventions and 
treatments to improve the management of seizures and their comorbid conditions or consequences. 
There remains, however, a dramatic inequality in access to and utilization of research resources 
and expertise across the globe. 
Investment in research for epilepsy is insufficient. Even in HIC, where significant investments in 
epilepsy research have been made, funding for epilepsy only represents a small proportion of overall 
funding. In the United States of America, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) support for epilepsy 
research accounted for less than 0.09% of the total NIH budget dedicated to research and has stagnated 
over the last 3 years, unlike other neurological conditions which have attracted increasing research support, 
e.g. Alzheimer disease research, autism and rare diseases. 
The barriers in funding epilepsy research are higher in LMIC, where financing comes from domestic 
organizations and most funding is directed towards communicable diseases and little towards epilepsy. 
Whether research is preclinical, clinical or at the population level, it is important to engage and sustain the 
best pool of researchers in the field, at all career stages, and enrich the available resources by maintaining 
collaborations within and beyond the epilepsy community to facilitate this. 
Epilepsy: a public health imperative
12
Developing epilepsy research priorities around the world may be a vehicle to improve research 
support and advocacy. Recognizing the need to determine possible areas of research priority, and as 
a response to regional declarations on epilepsy, taskforces combining regional expertise from ILAE and 
IBE were established to address research priorities in their region. A significant role in the advocacy for 
epilepsy research has also been played by organizations led by families that have experienced epilepsy, 
e.g. Citizens United for Research in Epilepsy (CURE). 
The way to advance epilepsy research is through capacity building, especially research partnerships between 
HIC and LMIC; increased funding and infrastructure for epilepsy research; optimization of research process 
standardization; establishment of global, regional and national research priorities; enhanced efforts to 
translate research findings into policies and programmes; and fostering stakeholder collaboration and 
partnership. 
The way forward
Major gaps in awareness, diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy impose a significant global burden on the 
lives of people with epilepsy. Epilepsy: a public health imperative raises epilepsy as a public health priority 
to address these gaps through a cost-effective, coordinated response. People with epilepsy and their 
families are asking that this unique opportunity not be lost, and that global action be taken. 
Urgent actions are needed, and these include:
•	 Promote epilepsy as a public health priority to reduce its burden.
•	 Improve public attitudes, reduce stigma and promote protection of the rights of people with 
epilepsy.
•	 Invest in health and social care systems to improve accessibility to epilepsy care.
•	 Enhance access to cost-effective antiseizure medications globally.
•	 Prevent acquired epilepsies through improved care for common causes, such as perinatal 
injury, central nervous system infections, stroke and traumatic brain injuries.
•	 Increase priority given to epilepsy in research agendas.
The time to act is NOW.
EPILEPSY
A public health imperative
